
# syllabus

## description

ME497/ME597 Reproducible Research (4R-0L-4C).

We explore the principles and practice of reproducible research by
learning to organize a technical project for reproducibility from the
beginning of the project and to explicitly link narrative and computing.
The course takes you through a reproducible research workflow including
collaboration and version control via GitHub.

While the course has an ME prefix, no mechanical engineering bckground
is required. Ths course is open to all majors, especially anyone
interested in data science.

The software environment is R & RStudio—no prior experience required.

## prerequisites

497: Junior standing  
597: Instructor permission required. Graduate students only with a
project underway generating quantitative data.

## instructor

Richard Layton, PhD  
Professor of Mechanical Engineering  
Moench Hall C–217  
<layton@rose-hulman.edu>  
812–877–8905

## textbook

**Required text** (2017) Garrett Grolemund and Hadley Wickham, *R for
Data Science*, O’Reilly Media. [free e-copy
online](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/). This book is particularly useful for
the R novice.

![](../resources/images/r-4-data-science-cover.png)

**Optional reference text** Christopher Gandrud, 2015, *Reproducible
Research with R and RStudio, 2/e*, CRC Press. This book addresses our
reproducibility topics in detail, making it a quite useful companion
text.

![](../resources/images/gandrud-cover.jpg)

## objectives

After successfully completing this course, students should be able to:

  - Identify non-reproducible practices in a conventional workflow
  - Describe the problems that reproducibility helps solve
  - List the basic principles of reproducible research
  - Organize directories and files for reproducibility
  - Create reproducible reports using R and RStudio
  - Reproduce someone else’s reproducible project
  - Implement version control using Git and GitHub

## grades

Grades awarded are based on the [Institute
standards](https://www.rose-hulman.edu/campus-life/student-services/registrar/rules-and-procedures/grades.html),
for example, an “A” is an *honor grade*, a “B” is awarded for *thorough
competence*, and a “C” indicates that *minimum standards have been met*.

For all students, 70% of the grade is project work and 30% of the grade
is for particpation, reading, discussion, and their collaborator role:
cloning, reproducing, reviewing, and commenting on someone else’s
reproducible project 2.

  - (20%) Collaborator role
  - (10%) Participation, readings, discussions

Project work for 497 students is weighted:

  - (30%) Project 1: Recreating one’s own prior report in reproducible
    form
  - (40%) Project 2: Major term-project in data gathering, data
    carpentry, analysis, and milestone documentation

Project work for 597 students is weighted:

  - (16%) Project 1: Recreating one’s own prior report in reproducible
    form
  - (27%) Project 2: Major term-project in data gathering, data
    carpentry, analysis, and milestone documentation
  - (27%) Project 3 on a topic related to your thesis or master project

## academic accommodations

I understand that “invisible” disabilities (learning and attention
deficit disorders, chronic fatigue syndrome, clinical depression, etc.)
can significantly affect a student’s academic performance. I strongly
encourage students to document special academic needs with staff at the
Office of Student Affairs, and then to contact me as soon as possible so
that we can work together to provide recommended academic accommodations
while protecting your privacy. It is the student’s responsibility to
request any approved, documented academic accommodations at least *one
week* in advance of the event.

## academic integrity

Do your own work. Write your own scripts. Every draft and every revision
reflects your thinking.

Collaboration is still encouraged. Doing your own work does not mean
that you work in isolation.

  - An ethical author can *discuss ideas* with others. An ethical author
    does not have to be a lone genius working in isolation.
  - An ethical author can use code fragments or design ideas from
    *credible external sources* such as R blogs, books, or class
    materials. The R community provides abundant help.
  - An ethical author can teach others and learn from others. Help a
    classmate debug their code, but *view their code only*.

Avoid peer-to-peer plagiarism. Teaching and learning are not the same as
showing and copying.

Do not compare one another’s code line by line, do not share your files,
do not copy another’s code fragments, and do not represent someone
else’s work as your own. All are academic misconduct.

\`\`Rose-Hulman expects its students to be responsible adults and to
behave at all times with honor and integrity.’’ (RHIT Academic Rules and
Procedures.) It is my policy to follow the letter and intent of the
Rules and Procedures regarding academic misconduct.

## caveat

I reserve the right to modify the course content, schedule, policies,
etc. outlined in this syllabus. I will do my best to give you adequate
notice of revisions.
